External links
Wizarding World: The Official Home of Harry Potter

=== Albus Dumbledore ===

Albus Dumbledore  is a fictional character in the  Harry Potter series of novels by J. K. Rowling. For most of the series, he is the headmaster of the wizarding school Hogwarts. He is also the founder and leader of the Order of the Phoenix, an organisation dedicated to fighting the Dark wizard Lord Voldemort.
In the novels, Dumbledore is widely regarded as one of the most powerful and influential wizards of his time. Renowned for his wisdom, kindness, and formidable magical abilities, he plays a crucial role in shaping the events of the wizarding world. As a mentor to Harry Potter, he provides guidance and crucial knowledge in the fight against Voldemort. Despite his benevolent image, Dumbledore's past is marked by tragedy and complexity, including his youthful association with Gellert Grindelwald, a dark wizard he later defeated. His philosophical views on power, love, and death are central themes in the series.
Dumbledore is portrayed by Richard Harris in the film adaptations of Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone (2001) and Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (2002). Following Harris' death in October 2002, Michael Gambon was cast in the role. He plays Dumbledore in six Harry Potter films, which were released from 2004 to 2011. Jude Law portrays a middle-aged version of the character in the prequel films Fantastic Beasts: The Crimes of Grindelwald (2018) and Fantastic Beasts: The Secrets of Dumbledore (2022). John Lithgow is set to portray Dumbledore in the upcoming HBO series Harry Potter.

Creation and development
Rowling has described Dumbledore as very wise and "the epitome of goodness". She said that he speaks for her, as he knows almost everything about the Harry Potter universe. According to Rowling, Dumbledore is a mentor to the central character Harry Potter, and he knows that Harry will need to learn difficult lessons to prepare him for challenges in his life. Dumbledore "allows Harry to get into what he would not allow another pupil to do, and he also unwillingly permits Harry to confront things he'd rather protect him from." In a 1999 interview, Rowling stated that she imagined Dumbledore as elderly and stately, and compared him to John Gielgud." In 2000, she said that Dumbledore is a hundred and fifty years old during the events of the novels. However, she has stated on her website that he was born in 1881, which makes him either 115 or 116 when he dies in the sixth novel.

In 2007, Rowling was asked whether Dumbledore ever found true love. She replied that she always thought of Dumbledore as being homosexual, and that he had fallen in love with the corrupt wizard Gellert Grindelwald; Rowling did not explicitly state whether Grindelwald returned his affections. She explained that Dumbledore lost his moral compass when he fell in love, which led him to become interested for a brief time in wizard domination over Muggles (non-magical people). Rowling added that Dumbledore subsequently did not trust his own moral judgment, and became asexual and celibate.
The name "Dumbledore" is borrowed from a dialectal word for "bumblebee". Rowling chose the name because Dumbledore loves music, and she imagined him walking around and humming to himself frequently.

Appearances in novels
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone
Dumbledore is introduced in the opening chapter of the first novel in the series, Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone (1997). Under cover of night, he brings the infant Harry Potter to the home of Harry's uncle and aunt, Vernon and Petunia Dursley. Harry's parents were killed by the Dark wizard Voldemort, and Dumbledore hopes he will be safe with the Dursleys. He leaves Harry on the doorstep with a letter explaining the situation. When Harry arrives at Hogwarts ten years later, Dumbledore tells him about the Mirror of Erised, a magical object that protects the Philosopher's Stone. Dumbledore is summoned to the Ministry of Magic by a false message on the night when Harry, Ron Weasley, Hermione Granger, and Professor Quirinus Quirrell enter the dungeons to retrieve the Stone. He realises during the trip that he is needed at Hogwarts, and returns in time to rescue Harry from Quirrell and Voldemort.

Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets
Dumbledore returns in the second novel, Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (1998). Through a magical diary, Harry sees a younger Dumbledore in a series of flashbacks. The diary once belonged to Tom Riddle, who eventually became Voldemort. In one flashback, Harry sees Dumbledore questioning Riddle about a series of attacks on Muggle-born students. In the present, a basilisk emerges from the Chamber of Secrets and begins attacking people in Hogwarts. Following the attacks, Lucius Malfoy convinces the governors of Hogwarts to suspend Dumbledore from his position as Headmaster. Dumbledore is reinstated when it is revealed that Lucius coerced the governors into suspending him.

Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban
At the beginning of Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban (1999), Dumbledore is forced to accept the presence of Dementors at Hogwarts. The Dementors have been sent to protect the students from Sirius Black, a supposed murderer who escaped from the wizard prison Azkaban. When Black breaches Hogwarts, Dumbledore closes every entrance to the school and grounds. After the Dementors cause Harry to fall off his broom during a Quidditch match, Dumbledore becomes angry and uses his wand to help Harry return safely to the ground. Later, Dumbledore suggests that Hermione use her Time-Turner to save Black and Buckbeak the hippogriff from execution.

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire
In Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (2000), Dumbledore brings the Triwizard Tournament to Hogwarts. He also serves as a judge throughout the event. After the final task of the tournament, Harry returns from an encounter with Voldemort. Professor Mad-Eye Moody escorts Harry into the castle, and Dumbledore becomes suspicious. He discovers that Moody is actually Barty Crouch Jr., and that the real Moody is being held prisoner by Crouch. Later, Dumbledore listens to Harry's account of Voldemort's return.

Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix
In the fifth novel in the series, Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix (2003), Dumbledore is removed from his position as Chief Warlock of the Wizengamot, voted out of the Chairmanship of the International Confederation of Wizards, and is almost stripped of his Order of Merlin First Class due to his speeches regarding the return of Voldemort. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Magic attempts to discredit him and Harry, often through the Daily Prophet. Dumbledore enrages Minister for Magic Cornelius Fudge when he intercedes at a hearing to prevent Harry from being expelled from Hogwarts.
The Ministry passes Educational Decree Twenty-two, which allows Fudge to appoint Dolores Umbridge as the professor of Defence Against the Dark Arts. Through her, Fudge gradually gains power over Hogwarts and Dumbledore, whom he fears is amassing an underage wizard army to overthrow the Ministry. Umbridge forbids students from practicing defensive spells in her class, which prompts Harry, Ron, and Hermione to form a secret practice group called Dumbledore's Army. When the Ministry discovers the group, Dumbledore shields his students from punishment by falsely claiming that it was his idea. He is removed from the position of headmaster for the second time.
When the Order of the Phoenix battles Voldemort's Death Eaters in the Department of Mysteries, Dumbledore arrives to aid them. He subdues most of the Death Eaters and binds them with an Anti-Disapparition Jinx to prevent them from escaping. He then engages in a duel with Voldemort, who tries to possess Harry so Dumbledore will kill him. After this ruse fails, Voldemort is forced to flee with Bellatrix Lestrange. Several Ministry officials witness the end of the battle, which leads to Dumbledore being reinstated as headmaster. Dumbledore explains to Harry that Voldemort chose Harry as his equal, and that either he or Voldemort must eventually kill the other.

Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince
In Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (2005), Dumbledore brings Harry along as he attempts to persuade Horace Slughorn to rejoin the Hogwarts faculty. Harry notices that Dumbledore's right hand is shrivelled and blackened. During the school year, Dumbledore uses the Pensieve to teach Harry about Voldemort's life and his rise to power. In one of the Pensieve visions, Harry witnesses Dumbledore's first encounter with the young Tom Riddle. Dumbledore had known from the beginning that Riddle was dangerous, but believed that Hogwarts would change him.
Dumbledore and Harry learn that Voldemort created six Horcruxes to gain immortality, and that they must be destroyed before Voldemort can be killed. Harry repeatedly warns Dumbledore that Draco Malfoy is an agent of Voldemort, but Dumbledore refuses to take action against Draco. He tells Harry that he already knows more about what is happening than Harry does. Near the end of the novel, Dumbledore and Harry enter a cave in search of a Horcrux. Dumbledore drinks a potion inside the Horcrux's container and begins to scream in agony. When Harry attempts to retrieve some lake water for Dumbledore to drink, he is attacked by Inferi that reside in the lake. They try to drown Harry, but Dumbledore rescues him.
Dumbledore and Harry arrive in the Hogwarts Astronomy Tower with the Horcrux. Dumbledore asks Harry not to interfere in the events that are about to take place, and puts him in a body-binding curse. Immobilized, Harry is unable to intervene as Draco arrives and disarms Dumbledore. Several other Death Eaters then enter the tower and try to persuade Draco to kill Dumbledore. When Draco hesitates, Severus Snape appears and performs the killing curse on the headmaster. His funeral is attended by students, Hogwarts staff, members of the Ministry of Magic and others. He is entombed in a marble sarcophagus beside the Hogwarts lake.

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows
Details of Dumbledore's earlier life are revealed in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows (2007). The novel introduces his parents, Percival and Kendra Dumbledore, and his younger sister, Ariana (his younger brother, Aberforth, is mentioned in previous books). At the age of six, Ariana was attacked by three Muggle boys who witnessed her performing magic. She was deeply traumatised and was never able to control her magic again. Enraged, Percival attacked the boys and was given a life sentence in Azkaban. Kendra subsequently moved the family to the village of Godric's Hollow. Around the time that Albus completed his education, Ariana accidentally killed their mother. Albus became the head of the family and remained in their house with Ariana while Aberforth finished school.
Soon afterward, Dumbledore befriended the young wizard Gellert Grindelwald. They dreamed of uniting the three Deathly Hallows – the Elder Wand, the Resurrection Stone and the Cloak of Invisibility – and creating a world in which wizards rule over Muggles. One day, an argument between Albus, Aberforth, and Grindelwald led to a duel that resulted in Ariana's death. For the rest of his life, Albus felt guilty, never certain whether it was his own curse or another's that killed his sister. He felt he could not be trusted with power and turned down the position of Minister for Magic multiple times, eventually returning to Hogwarts as a professor of Transfiguration. Decades later, Dumbledore faced and defeated Grindelwald, who had become a Dark wizard and had obtained the Elder Wand. Dumbledore now possessed not only the Elder Wand but also the Cloak of Invisibility, which he had borrowed from James Potter before his death. Dumbledore would eventually pass the cloak on to Harry.
The truth about Dumbledore's death is revealed to Harry through Snape's memories in the Pensieve. Harry learns that Dumbledore put on a cursed ring that held the Resurrection Stone, which he hoped would allow him to apologise to his sister and parents. The curse damaged his hand, and Snape told him he would die in about a year. Dumbledore then revealed to Snape that he knew about Draco's attempts to kill him. Since Dumbledore was close to death, he asked Snape to use the killing curse on him. This act of self-sacrifice would prevent Draco's soul from being damaged by committing murder, and would cause Voldemort to trust Snape completely.
Near the end of the novel, Harry is struck by Voldemort's killing curse. He finds himself in an ethereal realm with Dumbledore, who confesses many regrets from earlier in his life. He informs Harry that he can return to his body and face the Dark Lord again. Harry returns, kills Voldemort, then places the Elder Wand in Dumbledore's tomb. In the book's epilogue, it is revealed that Harry named his second son Albus Severus Potter, after Dumbledore and Snape.

Portrayal in other media
Film
In the film adaptations of Philosopher's Stone (2001) and Chamber of Secrets (2002), Dumbledore is portrayed by Richard Harris, who was expected to play the character throughout the entire series. Before Harris was cast, Patrick McGoohan reportedly had an interest in the role, but could not commit due to health issues. Sean Connery was approached, but declined due to the film's subject matter. Harris turned down the role three times but eventually accepted it because his 11-year-old granddaughter threatened to never speak to him again if he did not take it. Harris was determined to portray Dumbledore again in Prisoner of Azkaban (2004), despite having been diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma, and asked David Heyman not to recast the role. However, his death in October 2002 led to recasting.
Christopher Lee was the producers' first choice for replacing Harris. However, Lee's commitments as Saruman in The Lord of the Rings trilogy and Count Dooku in the Star Wars prequels forced him to decline. Ian McKellen was offered the role but turned it down, as he had recently played another wizard character, Gandalf, in The Lord of the Rings. In addition, Harris had called McKellen a "dreadful" actor, and McKellen did not wish to take Harris' role. Harry Robinson, who was a body double for Harris in Chamber of Secrets, was also considered for the part. Harris' family reportedly wanted Peter O'Toole to be cast, but Michael Gambon was ultimately chosen. Gambon adopted a slight Irish accent for the role, which he reprised in all the remaining Harry Potter films.
In flashback scenes in Deathly Hallows – Part 1 and Part 2, a young Dumbledore is portrayed by Toby Regbo. In the prequel films Fantastic Beasts: The Crimes of Grindelwald (2018) and Fantastic Beasts: The Secrets of Dumbledore (2022), Dumbledore is played by Jude Law.