Stage adaptation
Harry Potter and the Cursed Child is a play written by Jack Thorne from a story by Thorne, J. K. Rowling and John Tiffany. It takes place nineteen years after the events of Deathly Hallows. In the play, Harry is Head of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement at the Ministry of Magic. The story focuses on Harry's son, Albus Severus Potter.

Characterisation
Outward appearance
In the novels, Harry is described as having his father's perpetually untidy black hair, his mother's bright green eyes, and a lightning bolt-shaped scar on his forehead. At the beginning of the series, he is short and skinny for his age, but in later novels he grows enough that other characters describe him as tall. Harry has a thin face and "knobbly" knees, and he wears Windsor glasses, which Rowling said point to his vulnerability. When asked about the meaning behind Harry's scar, Rowling said she wanted him to be "physically marked by what he has been through". She said the scar is "an outward expression of what he has been through inside".

Personality
Rowling made Harry an orphan because she felt an orphan would be interesting to write about. After Rowling's mother died, she wrote some of her own grief into him, describing him as a child longing to see his dead parents.
Rowling has described Harry as honourable. She says that he is strongly guided by his own conscience, and has a keen feeling of what is right and wrong. In her eyes, he is competitive but not cruel, and he is a fighter who refuses to take abuse. She calls him a normal boy who has qualities most people admire, which makes him a hero in her view, and very likeable. She has claimed that Harry is a suitable role model for real-world children.
Rowling admits that Harry sometimes makes mistakes, and she says his character flaws include anger and impulsiveness. She said that because he has limited access to caring adults, he is forced to make his own choices at a younger age than most people. According to Rowling, a pivotal moment in Harry's life occurs in the fourth novel, when he protects the body of Cedric Diggory from Voldemort, because it shows he is brave and selfless.

Magical abilities and skills
Throughout the series, Harry is described as a gifted wizard. He has a particular talent for flying, which manifests itself in Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone the first time he tries it, and gets him a place on a Quidditch team one year before the normal minimum joining age. He captains it in his sixth year. In his fourth year, Harry is able to confront a dragon on his broomstick.
Harry is also gifted in Defence Against the Dark Arts, in which he becomes proficient due to his repeated encounters with Voldemort and various monsters. In his third year, Harry becomes able to cast the very advanced Patronus Charm, and by his fifth year he has become so talented at the subject that he is able to teach his fellow students in Dumbledore's Army, some even older than him how to defend themselves against Dark Magic. At the end of that year, he achieves an 'Outstanding' Defence Against the Dark Arts O.W.L., something that not even Hermione achieved.
Harry also has the unusual ability to speak and understand "Parseltongue", a language associated with dark magic. This, it transpires, is because he harbours a piece of Voldemort's soul. He loses this ability after the part of Voldemort's soul inside him is destroyed at the end of The Deathly Hallows. However, in the events of Harry Potter and the Cursed Child, it was revealed that he had not lost the ability to recognise or speak the language when he encountered Delphini, Voldemort's daughter, who was trying to use his son and Draco Malfoy's son Scorpius to fulfill a prophecy that could guarantee the return of Voldemort by changing time.

Reception
In 2002, Book magazine ranked Harry Potter No. 85 among the "100 Best Fictional Characters since 1900". Entertainment Weekly ranked Harry Potter number two on its 2010 "100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years" list, saying "Long after we've turned the last page and watched the last end credit, Harry still feels like someone we know. And that's the most magical thing about him." UGO Networks listed Harry as one of their best heroes of all time, who said that "Harry is a hero to the often oppressed and downtrodden young fan boys and girls out there, who finally have an icon that is respected and revered by those who might otherwise look down on robe-wearing and wand waving as dork fodder". Harry Potter was also ranked number thirty-six on Empire's 2008 list of "100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time". IGN said that Harry Potter was their favourite Harry Potter character, calling him a "sympathetic figure" and saying in response to his fights against Voldemort that "everybody loves an underdog story of good vs. evil".
On the other hand, he has received criticism. In 2010, he was voted the 35th "Worst Briton" in Channel 4's "100 Worst Britons We Love to Hate" programme. In The Irish Times, Ed Power called Harry an "anointed cherub" who is "told he is special from the very outset" before he has any "winning attributes". Power said Harry is "celebrated as an overachiever before he's achieved anything". Lannah Marshall called Harry "a bland character". She further described him as "an audience surrogate, or what I call a 'puppet protagonist'. A puppet protagonist is a main character with dull, limited personality, enabling the audience to step inside the role and use their imagination to fill in the rest.
Despite blowback from some Christian fundamentalists critical of Rowling's usage of witchcraft and magic in the series, other Christian critics, including Rev. John Killinger, have argued that Potter is a Christ figure in the series. Killinger opined in 2002 that "J.K. Rowling has written the Christ story of the 21st century, and it's wonderful that she has attained such a magnificent following worldwide." He noted several allusions to Jesus in Potter's character arcs in Philosopher's Stone and Chamber of Secrets. Rowling herself later admitted that the Gospel story inspired that of Harry Potter, especially with his ultimate sacrifice in Deathly Hallows and apparent death before returning to defeat Voldemort once and for all.

In popular culture
Wizard rock bands like Harry and the Potters dress up like Harry Potter, sporting painted forehead scars, black wigs, and round bottle top glasses. Wizard rock is a musical movement dating from 2002 that consists of at least 200 bands made up of young musicians, playing songs about Harry Potter. The movement started in Massachusetts with the band Harry and the Potters, who cosplay as Harry during live performances.

Parodies
In April 2009, a group of University of Michigan students eventually known as StarKid Productions performed Harry Potter: The Musical, a two-act musical parody that featured major elements from all seven books and an original score. They posted the entire musical on their YouTube channel but removed it in late June, to edit some more mature elements from the videos. The musical, re-titled A Very Potter Musical, was reposted on 5 July 2009, starring Darren Criss as Harry Potter. A sequel was premiered at the 2010 HPEF Harry Potter Conference Infinitus, and released on YouTube on 22 July at 8 pm EST. The sequel was called A Very Potter Sequel and featured the Death Eaters using the Time-Turner to go back in time to Harry's first year in Hogwarts. Harry Potter is spoofed in the Barry Trotter series by American writer Michael Gerber, where a "Barry Trotter" appears as the eponymous antihero. On his homepage, Gerber describes Trotter as an unpleasant character who "drinks too much, eats like a pig, sleeps until noon, and owes everybody money". The author stated "[s]ince I really liked Rowling's books ... I felt obligated to try to write a spoof worthy of the originals".

Notes
References
Further reading
Daly, Steve (27 July 2007). "Daniel Radcliffe: My Take on Deathly Hallows". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 26 September 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2007.

=== Hogwarts ===

Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry () is a fictional boarding school of magic in the Harry Potter series by J. K. Rowling. It is the primary setting for the first six novels and films and also serves as a major setting in the larger Wizarding World media franchise.
In the novels, Hogwarts is described as a coeducational, secondary boarding school that enrolls children from ages eleven to eighteen. According to Rowling, any child in Britain who shows magical ability is invited to attend the school. The Wizarding World website states that Hogwarts was founded in the Highlands of Scotland sometime between the 9th and 10th century by the wizards Godric Gryffindor, Helga Hufflepuff, Rowena Ravenclaw and Salazar Slytherin. Rowling has offered varying accounts of how many students are enrolled at Hogwarts at any given time.
In a 1999 interview, Rowling said she envisioned Hogwarts as a place that offers security to the orphaned Harry Potter. She said that she made Hogwarts a boarding school because many important plot events occur at night. Several writers have suggested that Rowling took the name "Hogwarts" from the 1954 book How to Be Topp by Geoffrey Willans; the book describes a fictional play titled "The Hogwarts" and a fictional school headmaster named "Hoggwart". Rowling, however, said she may have unknowingly derived the name "Hogwarts" from the name of the hogwort plant.
The word "hogwarts" also appears once in the 1939 novel Finnegans Wake by James Joyce.

Castle and grounds
Rowling has described Hogwarts as a "huge, rambling, quite scary-looking castle, with a jumble of towers and battlements". She said the castle is supported by magic. The school grounds have sloping lawns, vegetable gardens and greenhouses. There is a pitch for playing the wizard sport Quidditch, and a large wooded area known as the Forbidden Forest. There is also a lake, which is home to merpeople, grindylows and a giant squid. Wizards cannot apparate (teleport) on Hogwarts grounds, but there are several hidden passages that lead into and out of the school. In Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (2000), it is explained that Muggles (non-magical people) cannot see Hogwarts because there are numerous enchantments on it.
A subterranean area of the castle known as the Chamber of Secrets is introduced in the second novel, Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (1998). In the novel, the young student Ginny Weasley is forced to open the Chamber by the Dark wizard Voldemort. From the Chamber emerges a deadly Basilisk, which attacks students until Harry kills it. A magical room called the Room of Requirement is also located in Hogwarts. It only appears when someone needs it, and contains whatever the person requires. In Order of the Phoenix (2003), Harry holds meetings of his student group Dumbledore's Army in the Room of Requirement. In Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (2005), Draco Malfoy uses the room to hide and repair a Vanishing Cabinet, which allows him to smuggle Voldemort's Death Eaters into Hogwarts.

Houses
When a first-year student arrives at Hogwarts, the magical Sorting Hat is placed on their head. It examines their mind and assigns them to a House based on their abilities, personality, and preferences. Hogwarts has four Houses, each named after one of the founders of the school. Throughout the school year, the Houses compete for the House Cup, gaining and losing points based on actions such as performance in class and rule violations. The House with the most points at the end of the year wins the House Cup and has its colours displayed in the Great Hall during the following school year. Each House also has its own Quidditch team that competes for the Quidditch Cup. Each House is under the authority of one of the Hogwarts professors. The four Houses are described below.

Gryffindor values courage, nerve, and chivalry. Gryffindor's mascot is a lion, and the Head of House is Minerva McGonagall. The Gryffindor dormitories are in a high tower, and students must use a password to gain entry. According to Rowling, Gryffindor corresponds roughly to the element of fire.
Hufflepuff values hard work, patience, justice, and loyalty. Hufflepuff's mascot is a badger, and the Head of House is Pomona Sprout. Rowling said that Hufflepuff corresponds roughly to the element of earth.
Ravenclaw values intelligence, learning, wisdom, and wit. The house mascot is an eagle in the novels, and a raven in the Harry Potter and Fantastic Beasts films. In the novels, the Head of Ravenclaw House is Filius Flitwick. The dormitories are in Ravenclaw Tower, and students must solve a riddle to gain entry. Ravenclaw corresponds roughly to the element of air.
Slytherin values ambition, cunning, leadership, and resourcefulness. The mascot of Slytherin is a serpent. Severus Snape is the Head of Slytherin House until he becomes headmaster, at which point Horace Slughorn assumes the position. The Slytherin dormitories are accessed by speaking a password in front of a stone wall in the dungeons, which causes a hidden door to open. Slytherin corresponds roughly to the element of water.
Each year, two fifth-year students from each House are selected as prefects. The position grants them certain privileges and the authority to give detentions for infractions. The leaders of the student body, the head girl and head boy, are chosen from among the seventh-year students. Hogwarts students in their third year or higher are allowed to visit the nearby wizarding village of Hogsmeade.

Hogwarts Express
The Hogwarts Express is described as a steam train that transports students to and from Hogwarts. At the beginning of each school year, the train departs from the fictional Platform 9¾ at London's King's Cross station and delivers students to Hogsmeade Station. A functioning full-scale replica of the Hogwarts Express was created for The Wizarding World of Harry Potter themed area at Universal Orlando Resort. The train transports visitors from a life-size replica of Hogsmeade Village to a replica of Diagon Alley.

In film
Hogwarts is featured in the Harry Potter film adaptations. England's Alnwick Castle was used for many scenes depicting exterior parts of the school. Shots of the entire school were created by adding a digital spire to images of Durham Cathedral, which also served as a set for the interior of Hogwarts. A detailed scale model of Hogwarts was also used during production of the films.

Cultural impact
In 2008, the Independent Schools Network Rankings website featured Hogwarts on a list of the best schools in Scotland. Frank Tiarks, the managing director of the website, said Hogwarts was included on the list for fun. It was ranked as the 36th-best school, surpassing Edinburgh's Loretto School.

See also
List of Harry Potter characters
Fictional universe of Harry Potter
Places in Harry Potter
Warner Bros. Studio Tour London: The Making of Harry Potter

Notes
References
Further reading
Boyle, F. (2004). A Muggle's Guide to the Wizarding World: Exploring the Harry Potter universe. ECW Press. pp. 192–195. ISBN 978-1-55022-655-3. Retrieved 18 June 2016. (subscription required)
Fowler, C. (2014). The Ravenclaw Chronicles: Reflections from Edinboro. Cambridge Scholars Publisher. pp. 74–77. ISBN 978-1-4438-6598-2. Retrieved 18 June 2016.
"Harry Potter West Coast Railway". Jacobite Steam Train. Archived from the original on 13 August 2008. Retrieved 2 September 2013.
Highfield, R. (2003). The Science of Harry Potter: How Magic Really Works. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-200355-8. Retrieved 19 June 2016.
Inggs, Judith (May 2003). "From Harry to Garri: Strategies for the Transfer of Culture and Ideology in Russian Translations of Two English Fantasy Stories". Meta: Translators' Journal. 48 (1–2 Traduction pour les enfants / Translation for children): 285–297. doi:10.7202/006975ar. S2CID 145173155.
Leroy, Kath (20 August 2020). "Harry Potter: What Is 'Hogwarts' In French? (& 9 Other Translations For The School)". ScreenRant. Retrieved 23 February 2021.
Neal, C.W. (2002). The Gospel According to Harry Potter: Spirituality in the stories of the world's most famous seeker. Gospel According to Series. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-22601-5. Retrieved 18 June 2016.
Spencer, R.A. (2015). Harry Potter and the Classical World: Greek and Roman allusions in J.K. Rowling's modern epic. McFarland. ISBN 978-1-4766-2141-8. Retrieved 18 June 2016.
Stouffer, Tere (2007). The Complete Idiot's Guide to the World of Harry Potter. Penguin. ISBN 9781440636615.